Facilitating the Creative Process
Mastering skills and acquiring knowledge are cognitively demanding. You can spend
a long time studying and practicing something before you form your own original
ideas for producing novel and creative content like an essay or a design.
During the creative process, you may have the writer’s block—difficulties with imagining
and visualizing scenes, navigating ideas, creating narratives, constructing arguments,
and understanding relationships between concepts. The creative process
requires a deep understanding of the purpose behind your creation and a clear awareness
of sources for inspiration and ideas you intend to draw upon. Often, when you
sit down to make something new like an original essay, you may find it difficult to
start from a blank screen or piece of paper. You will need to have done extensive
research on a topic to have formed your own opinions and the narrative you want to
write about.
The creative process also applies to design, not just writing. For instance, when
designing a user interface, you may need a few hours of design research by browsing
design websites for ideas on the color palette, layout, and composition before you
originate a design. Creating something truly original by looking at a blank canvas can
feel like climbing a wall bare-handed. You will need inspiration and have to follow a
creative process.
Producing original content requires creativity. Therefore, it is an extraordinary feat
for humans to produce original ideas from scratch. New ideas and creations are often
based on inspirations, connecting ideas and adaptations of other works. Creativity
involves complex, nonlinear thinking and emotional intelligence that makes it challenging
to replicate or automate with rules and algorithms. Yet it is now possible to
mimic creativity with generative AI.
GenAI tools can help you to streamline the process by bridging various ideas and
concepts from an extensive repository of human knowledge. Using these tools, you
can stumble upon novel ideas that required understanding a large body of interconnected
knowledge and the comprehension of the interactions between several concepts.
Additionally, these tools can assist you with imagining hard-to-visualize scenes
or concepts. To illustrate the point, try imagining the scene described in Example 1-1.